# Vortex Core Identification Example 

This example is based on the "Particle tracking in a flow past a 
hemispherical roughness" example available on https://github.com/Nek5000/NekExamples

The original example illustrates particle tracking being used in a "bubble wire"
mode in which particles are periodicly released along a horizontal
line segment upstream of a hemispherical roughness element [1,2].  

## Vortex Core Identification
Currently, this set up illustrates the use of different vortex core identification
metholologies from the literature.
This routine calculates the vortex core region using one of the following 
identification methods:

'lambda2': Generates Lambda-2 vortex of Jeong & Hussein, JFM '95 [3] using the standard 
nek5k routine 'lamdba2'

'q': Generates Q criterion vortex of Hunt, Wray & Moin, CTR-S88 '88 [4]

'delta': Generates Discriminant (DELTA) criterion vortex of 
Chong, Perry & Cantwell, Phys. Fluids '90 [5]

'swirling': Generates Swirling Strength (lambda_ci^2) vortex of 
Zhou, Adrian, Balachandar and Kendall, JFM '99 [6]

## PARTICLE TRACKING

Currently, this is set up to support only a few bubble wires,
in order to illustrate basic particle tracking.  

## CONFIGURATION:

The hemisphere of radius R=0.5 is placed onto a thin cylinder of 
radius R and height dz = 0.1R, which is placed onto a smooth 
plate. The depth, width and length of the channel are H=6.5R, 
B=12.8R and L=36.4R. The boundary conditions (BC) are a Dirichlet 
BC as a prescribed Blasius profile at the inlet, outflow BC 
at the outlet and stress free symmetry conditions at the lateral 
boundaries and at the channel surface.    

The Blasius profile is approximated with the following formula: 

u = U0 sin ( pi y / 2d )

d=1.2R is the boundary layer thickness 
U0 =1.0 is the free stream velocity. 

Suggested Reynolds numbers (Re=UR/nu): Re=100, Re=450, Re=700

Particles can be plotted with the attached matlab script, "plotit.m"

A visit script will be provided soon.

[1] M.S. Acalar and C.R. Smith, "A study of hairpin vortices in a laminar 
boundary layer: Part 1, hairpin vortices generated by a hemisphere 
protuberance," J. Fluid Mech. 175, pp. 1-41, 1987

[2] H.M. Tufo, P.F. Fischer, M.E. Papka and K. Blom, "Numerical simulation 
and immersive visualization of hairpin vortices," Proc. of the ACM/IEEE 
SC99 Conf. on High Performance Networking and Computing, IEEE Computer Soc., 1999.

[3] Jeong, J., & Hussain, F. (1995). On the identification of a vortex. Journal
 of fluid mechanics, 285, 69-94.
 
[4] Hunt, J. C., Wray, A. A., & Moin, P. (1988). Eddies, streams, and 
convergence zones in turbulentflows. CTR-S88 1988

[5] Chong, M. S., Perry, A. E., & Cantwell, B. J. (1990). A general classification 
of three-dimensional flow fields. Physics of Fluids A: Fluid Dynamics, 2(5), 765-777.

[6] Zhou, J., Adrian, R. J., Balachandar, S., & Kendall, T. M. (1999). Mechanisms for generating
coherent packets of hairpin vortices in channel flow. Journal of fluid mechanics, 387, 353-396.
